---
layout: post
title:      "JIRA Software"
date:       2019-03-19 03:10:15 +0000
permalink:  jira_software
---


JIRA is a project management software that is designed for the software development process. JIRA has a user-friendly and intuitive platform that allows users to be able to create issues as a way to manage tasks throughout the completion of a project. More specifically, users create epics which are themes around which a collection of issues, or specific tasks, are created and managed. This blog post will provide an overview of the JIRA software and its various features.

The JIRA platform serves as a location where developers can manage their team’s backlog and which provides visibility to all members of the software development team regarding the status of their projects and its individual tasks. At the beginning of the software development process, engineers will plan the priorities for the development which will take place over the course of a sprint (if using the Scrum development framework). A sprint is a period of time which typically lasts around a couple of weeks, during which a certain number of tasks are scheduled for completion.

This high-level overview for the software planning process will require that epics, or specific themes around which the work will be completed, is created first. The epics will then be broken down into individual tasks which are each designated a certain number of story points. Story points is a key concept in the Scrum development framework which allows you to give an approximate weight to a task relative to the level of complexity of other tasks. It provides a standard measurement by which you can compare tasks and evaluate how many tasks can be completed during a given sprint. Additionally, JIRA also gives you the option to track the amount of time that it takes to complete tasks even if the standard measurement that is being used is story points. 

Story points can therefore be used as a way to not only keep track of individual tasks, but also keep track of the overall progress of a sprint and software development project. At the end of the sprint, the objective is to calculate the number of story points that were accomplished, which provides a real measurement of the amount of work that can be completed during any given sprint. Past performance is then used as a realistic benchmark for the amount of work that a software development team is able to accomplish, as opposed to the number of hours that it would take to accomplish the same volume of work which is uncertain. During a retrospective session, the software development team is able to reflect on the past performance and utilize this information in order to improve and plan with greater accuracy for the next sprint. JIRA provides a number of reports that can be used for analysis as well, such as the burndown, sprint and velocity reports, which provide quantitative data on the sprint progress and completion.

Developers are able to use JIRA to keep track of all of the issues and tasks related to a software development project and which provides constant monitoring. Developers are able to search for issues in JIRA, either by conducting a basic search using key terms or by an advanced search which utilizes the JQL query language as a way to filter for certain information. Once particular tasks are completed, they can be marked as done. If tasks are actively being worked on, they can also be marked with an in-progress status. Issues can also be dragged up and down into an active sprint or placed in the list of high priority items for the subsequent sprint. The JIRA platform is an intuitive and visual platform which allows you to visualize the workflow and which allows you to integrate changes in the software with the source code and common developer tools, such as Confluence.

As a result, the JIRA software is a valuable platform that allows developers to collaborate, align on the vision and priorities for a software development project, and which enables communication among all members of a software development team. There are various features in the JIRA platform which can be used for real-time issue monitoring, task progress, and overall velocity measurement of any given sprint. The JIRA software is designed to complement the agile development methodologies, such as the Scrum and Kanban development frameworks, in order to enable software development teams to execute in a way that is both rapid and quality driven.

